# chapter 0a: Introduction to the Steam Controller

suggested watching:
[James Minicki - "The Steam Controller: An Analysis - COMPLETE EDITION"](https://youtu.be/jJlASBfy83M)
[Nerrel - "The Life, Embarrassing Death, and Legacy of the Steam Controller"](https://youtu.be/5dsL1wgu2e8)

## What is the Steam Controller?

The Steam Controller is a pc gaming input peripheral in game pad form factor
made by Valve. That form factor includes console controllers such as the Xbox
controllers, Playstation Controllers, and various Nintendo Controllers though
most recently the Switch Pro controllers.

However, similarities with other game pads quickly run out as the Steam
Controller is very obviously different even at a glance. So different that many
might ask...

## Why was it made?

Valve developed the Steam Controller with an idea; to solve a pretty bulky
problem with pc couch gaming. Due to often requiring a keyboard and a mouse,
bringing the pc to the couch can often be unwieldy, clunky, and
uncomfortable. But if you use a traditional gamepad, you lose the precision of
the mouse and raw number of keybinds possible with a keyboard. Unless you are
fine with making serious compromises, its kind of a lose/lose situation.

With that in mind, the primary goal of the Steam Controller was to be a handheld
device much like console controllers for the comfort side of things, but then
offer a feature set that would allow it to control a pc in a similar way a
keyboard and mouse does. This would increase the comfort of pc couch gaming set
up without sacrificing the functionality of keyboard and mouse.

Another goal was to able to play the entire Steam library of games. This meant
the Steam Controller couldnt be something like the AlphaGrip iGrip, another
device that presented a similar solution to pc couch gaming but was intended
more as an accessibility device and suffered from another problem; Valve didnt
want to fall into the trap of having a "sea of buttons" when even games that
want a lot of keybinds dont need a full keyboards worth. Lastly, because the
Steam library includes games that already have controller support and therefore
expect a handful of analog inputs the Steam Controller needed to be able to
control those games too.

Put those two goals together and you wind up needing a device that sits between
a console controller and a keyboard and mouse, with input options and a feature
set versatile enough to fill several roles while also being as minimal as
possible to retain comfort.

They spent a lot of time prototyping (collage image here: https://steamcdn-a.akamaihd.net/valvesoftware/images/about/controller-protos.jpg ) and eventually came up with the Steam Controller that actually launched in November of 2015 (seen bottom left of that collage).

It has many components that are familiar to anyone who has used a console
controller alongside some stand out components that provide the versatility
needed... at the cost of being unfamiliar. Lets go through what the Steam
Controller hardware offers, without getting too technical (for now).

## The Feature Set

Lets start with the familiar game pad controls.

The Steam Controller has the typical ABXY button pad cluster, 2 bumpers, 2
triggers, start/select and home button triad, and an analog stick on the left
hand side. While the exact location and size of the abxy cluster does deviate
from the standard, all of these inputs are standard as they can be seen on
console controllers going back for more than 2 decades with the original dual
stick playstation controller.

Now, lets talk about the unfamiliar.

### Starting with some soft ball differences; 

The triggers are actually dual stage much like how the gamecube triggers
were. This means they have an analog range, but a button rests at the end of the
pull. Those additional buttons can be bound to do anything any other button
could do, but because they are at the end of the triggers ranges their exact use
will usually be something adjacent or otherwise related to trigger function. For
instance, the example Valve themselves use is to have the analog range portion
of the trigger activate "aim down sights" mode in first person shooters, and
then that second button is the actual fire button. That consolidates shooting
into an extension of aiming, instead of them being on entirely different inputs.

On the topic of additional buttons, the Steam Controller has 2 grip buttons on
the back. They can be bound in a similar fashion as Xbox Elite paddles by simply
duplicating a button from the abxy cluster, but they can also be bound to
entirely different things that arent on traditional game pads (keyboard keys,
modeshifts, etc).

Combining these additional buttons in various ways provides a lot of ways to
absorb other inputs, which overall increases your input efficiency and
throughput resulting in tighter, higher level/skill ceiling gameplay.

### On to the hard ball differences;

The Steam Controller includes a gyroscope and accelerometer, enabling it to do
motion control. This isnt an entirely new concept, but has mostly been
restricted to Nintendo games and systems. Unfortunately motion control got a bad
rap thanks to "waggle commands" back in the wii days, but motion control looks a
lot different these days. Outside of the occasional unfortunate gimmick that
still pops up, motion controls have been more or less limited to "gyro
aiming". Gyro aiming is a far more natural use for motion.

Think of the gyro as a mouse that is controlled through rotation instead of
translation, and it suddenly makes a lot of sense; it brings the power of mouse
aiming to controllers. Nintendo's audience demands it for any Switch port, and
Sony's audience is also starting to take note; the dual shock 3 had some limited
motion controls, with the dual shock 4 having more advanced motions capability
that has been carried over to the dual sense controllers. They are technically
capable of gyro aiming as well, but developers often dont implement such
controls for the playstation versions of their games for some reason.

### Moving on from gyro... the dual touch pads.

These are not like the touch pads you'd find on a laptop. They are high
resolution capacitive track pads, have haptic modules mounted to the bottoms of
them, and have a button underneath them for click actions. The software can then
be used to configure the pads to do any number of things... though some
functions are suggested due to their location combined with what the steam
controller lacks.

The right touch pad takes the place of a more standardized right analog stick,
which suggests what the right touch pad should be used for. In a fps, this means
camera controls. Regular joystick emulation is possible, though since its a
touch pad it can also do mouse control. It can even emulate how a trackball
functions!

The left touch pad takes the place of a more standardized Directional Pad, and
it even has a plus shaped indent. This suggests that the left touch pad should
be used like a d-pad, but its not limited to this function. Again, its a
programmable touch surface. If the game you want to play wants more than maybe 8
bindings (counting the diagonals as unique), the touch pad can be put into a
virtual menu mode and have up to 21 buttons!

Ultimately, how these pads get used is very much up to the user and the game
they wish to play due to the configurability the software provides. The main
issue? They are radically different to the point of warping other aspects of the
controller.

## The Ergonomics

The ergonomics of the controller are likewise very different from the
standard. The grips "swoop up" instead of down, and are quite a bit more bulbous
than grips on more traditional controllers. Is this crappy design, or genious
tier design? I'd say the latter.

Because of the emphasis on being a pc gamepad first, the touch pads are considered the primary input devices of the Steam Controller. You can see this in the prototype collage that was shown earlier(https://steamcdn-a.akamaihd.net/valvesoftware/images/about/controller-protos.jpg ). Once the touch pads were in play, the single left stick and abxy buttons were not re-added until much later. So, the controller was designed with the notion that the touch pads would be primarily what the player would interact with, and that necessitated some ergonomics choices that are questionable on the surface but make sense once examined.

The touch pads are not capable of multi touch. They only detect a single contact
area, completely failing to work with mutliple. That single contact area then
gets averaged to a point. If you lay your thumb flat the contact area could get
averaged to somewhere you dont want, which could in turn cause confusion and
disorientation as the controller isnt doing what you intended. This means, in
effect, that to get the most precise control out of the touch pads as possible
you want to minimize your contact area with them. Ideally, you'd be using just
your thumb tips.

The Steam Controllers ergonomics are set up to facilitate that. By lifting your
thumbs off the controller and allowing them to naturally arc down to the touch
pads - which are canted outwards and towards your thumbs by a small amount - the
tips alone should be contacting the pads.

All of this leads to a very "touch pads first" design, which does have some
ramifications on the familiarity side of things. It can feel incredibly awkward
or clumsy or uncomfortable to hold at first, especially if you try to force a
particular grip style. Instead, consider leaning into the ergonomics as
designed.

## The Grip Style

Holding the Steam Controller should be much less of a tight grip and more of a
gentle yet firm cradling. The bulbous grips form what in the knife and sword
world would be called "palm swells", which when tucked into your palm serve to
aid you in weilding it. Think of the Steam Controllers grips in a similar way.

Before picking up the Steam Controller, close your fist tightly for a few
seconds, then extend your fingers as far as they can go for a few seconds, then
let all the tension out and allow your hands to curl into a natural resting
position. At that point, take a look at your palms. Notice how the natural curl
has created a sort of "pocket" in the middle of your palms?

The Steam Controllers grips should go right into that pocket, and the strength
you use to grip it should be what I like to call a "firm cradle". Most of the
work of holding it should be done by the pockets in the middle of your palms,
and not by your fingers. In holding it this way, you may find several things
happen all at the same time; your index fingers may naturally rest on the
triggers allowing you to easily activate them with a pull, your middle fingers
may naturally rest of the grip buttons allowing you to activate them with an
intentional and not accidental squeeze, and your thumbs may naturally arc
exactly like mentioned previously; just the tips on the touch pads allowing you
to easily take advantage of the precision the touch pads offer.

Once your hands have found a very natural grip on the controller, it should be
comfortable to hold for extended periods of time and you should have access to
everything else too... though people with particularly small hands still might
have some issues because yes the steam controller is one big boi.

That might sound overly restrictive because maybe you want to use a different
grip style... but you can actually adjust your grip a bit from there. I've found
that I can rotate my hands "up" a bit for index on bumpers and middle on
triggers, though I've kept everything else more or less the same just with
slight modifications to account for the more "upwards" position.

So... acounting for everything, did Valve manage to meet their goal of creating
something in between a game pad and a keyboard and mouse set up to make pc couch
gaming more comfortable without sacrificing functionality?

Well, yes. And no. Its... complicated.

The Steam Controller certainly excells in that environment (though oddly Valves
usage data suggest most are using their steam controllers at their desk anyway),
but there is one major catch.

## What They Wound Up Making

Despite their marketing strategy of targetting couch gaming, this isnt a device
for the typical couch gamer. The typical couch gamer plays on the couch for
comfort and convenience, and while the Steam Controller can perform it
represents major hurdles to those two things.

By having a radically different hardware design and feature set, the first
hurdle comes in the form of learning how to use it. Not only did I spend an
entire section devoted to just how to hold the controller, but take into account
that the touch pads arent sticks or dpads. While they can perform those tasks
fine as will be shown later, they lack the same physicality of sticks and dpads
which feels really weird and can lead to a lot of unintended inputs when first
trying to use it. This means you have to relearn how to do those tasks on the
touch pads. For a couch gamer, this means its going to slam up against
potentially 20 or more years of experience using the more traditional dual stick
controllers. Not exactly ideal...

And then comes the configuration software. You'll have to learn this software to
get the most out of the Steam Controller, which is another hurdle. Its why I'm
writing this document, but ask yourself; does the typical couch gamer want to
read through all of this, just to use a radically different controller when
their current more standardized controller works "just fine"? The answer is more
than likely "no".

And if you look at it froma keyboard and mouse users perspective? I've been in
conversations where even if I manage to convince someone that gyro aim is
basically mouse aim and therefore really quite good, the response is usually
"well why not just use a mouse then?"... which is fair but completely misses the
point of wanting to use a controller. Basically, because this crowd is mostly
concerned with performance so the chances of them attempting to go through the
learning process just to get something that maybe performs on par with what they
were already using is pretty poor.

This makes the Steam Controller a niche and esoteric device. Why relearn
everything at my desk, when keyboard and mouse is right there? Why relearn
everything at the couch, when my standard controller works fine? To most people,
the Steam Controller is simply a non starter; combined with the main stream
reviews, the general sentiment is that its a "jack of all trades, master of
none" device that isnt worth your time.

I dont think that phrase does the Steam Controller justice though. There is a
modern extension to that phrase that I think does a much better job; "A jack of
all trades may be a master of none, but is often times better than a master of
one".

Where the typical game pad isnt ideal, mouse controls and loads of buttons, the steam controller is better.
Where a keyboard and mouse isnt ideal, analog controls come to mind, the steam controller is better.

Basically, the steam controllers unique feature set takes the strengths of the 2
other control methods and puts them together in a way that overcomes the
weaknesses of those other controls.

Its a single device that can do it all... and to a surprisingly high level
too. Even the "master of none" part of that phrase is being challenged these
days, as people push what is capable with the gyro.

People have even been using it in competitive fps' and doing quite well for
themselves. The combination of gyro and touch pad means that if there ever was a
controller that would go toe to toe with keyboard and mouse without leaning on
aim assists and could still hold its own, its the Steam Controller. Heck, with
gyro alone we have people putting out aim lab scores that exceed the median
scores on the leaderboard - a leaderboard filled with mouse users. So if a mouse
is the master at aiming and gyro users can perform on or above the level of
typical mouse users... then I dare say it shares that mastery. I've also pushed
what is possible using the touch pads to emulate the more standard dpad and
thumb sticks, and have posted times for speed runs that are pretty comparable to
the more traditional counterparts.

So, what is its mastery? Its a master at being the jack of all trades.

Its oozing with immense potential, and for those who have taken the time to
learn how to use it the Steam Controller is such an integral part of our gaming
experience that its discontinuation has hit hard. We are pining for a version 2
that improves several key areas of the controller while pushing the
possibilities of input.

So to sum this segment up...

In meeting the goal they set out for themselves, what Valve wound up making is
an enthusiast level device. Its the nerds controller. It was very much ahead of
its time, which makes its reception... pretty expected to be honest.

*[ Note from SoraFirestorm: the best way I can ever think of to describe the
 Steam Controller is "the Linux of gamepads", as I see a lot of parallels in
 learning this strange new device and relearning how you think about your
 computer and OS after a lifetime of using Windows or Mac. Whether or not you
 consider this good/bad is up to preference. ;) ]*

## The Reception

Summed up in a single sentence; the reception to the steam controller was
luke-warm at best.

As hinted at earlier, the main stream review outlets were doomed to be bad. Its
not entirely their fault, their job requirements mean they have to pump out
content asap. Its unfortunate, but that means that no one in the main stream
space would have ever been able to give the Steam Controller - or heck any new
innovative and radically different tech - the time of day. Result? Typically bad
reviews.

As far as big name youtubers... well there is some bad news on this front. They
might be independant from main stream sources, but big name youtubers still
operate in a similar manner; as much content as fast as possible is the best way
to success and a requirement for staying big once you've "made it". Maybe some
were able to flex it a bit, but the end result is still the same; generally bad
reviews, maybe one or two here or there found a thing or two they liked and
could see value in.

One thing both of the above have in common? Most never bothered to check out
gyro aiming. Thats surprisingly critical to how to aim well with any game pad,
so skipping over it entirely naturally leads to worse reviews.

Even worse, a lot didnt even check out the configuration options at all which
are crucial to getting a good response from it. To use an analogy, it doesnt
make sense to criticize a velcro or snap back adjustable hat for not fitting
your head "out of the box". Its designed to be adjusted to fit your head. Think
along those lines, only take into consideration the intersection of the games
you play and your play style when playing them, and having to change settings to
get a good response from entirely new/alien hardware that isnt natively
supported suddenly makes a lot of sense.

Smaller youtubers is where things get interesting. Freed from the shackles of
needing to pump out content, many smaller youtubers were able to spend time with
it, learn a thing or two, and put out actual good information. The result?
Well... still a mixed bag. There were still plenty of smaller youtubers who
jumped on the bandwagon of hating on the differences, though there was a lot
more positivity to be found here overall.

As for those who stuck with it? As mentioned in the preface, there is a
dedicated following and user base of the controller with many power users. To
us, its the best game pad that was on the market.

So... all of that brings us back to the summary at the start; luke-warm at best.

How does it play games anyway? Dont devs need to support the hardware to use it?
Why would devs add support for a discontinued product?

Rebinding software is the answer to the first question.
The answer to the second? No.
The answer to the third? They dont even need to, though because of how Steam Input works there are benefits if they do.

Valve made Steam Input alongside the Steam Controller. In a nut shell, its a
software utility that allows the user to assign whatever they want to wherever
they want on the Steam Controller. This means even if a dev doesnt add support
for the track pads and gyro, those inputs can still be used to play those
games. There is another layer to this that will be covered more in depth
later. Anyway, this means that the Steam Controller is basically future proof,
for the foreseeable future anyway, when it comes to what games support it. If
the game supports keyboard and mouse inputs, which it will because its a pc
game, then the Steam Controller can play it. If the game only supports xbox
controllers, Steam Input still allows you to bind xbox controls to the Steam
Controller, so the steam controller can play it.

But... it has been discontinued. What did it leave behind?

## The Steam Controllers Legacy.

Steam Input actually started out as the Steam Controller Configurator. It was
designed and coded specifically for the Steam Controller. However, Valve quickly
came to the conclusion that supporting all controller types had value and worked
to make that happen. They renamed it "Steam Input" and have added support for
just about every major controller on the market. Steam Input supports xbox
controllers, the dual shock series of controllers going back to the dual shock 3
(though you need psnow installed for the ds3 drivers for support to work), the
new Dual Sense Controller, the switch pro controller (though unfortunately not
the Joy-Cons), and just about any 3rd party variation of those controllers. It
even supports more generalized controllers if the user takes the time to map the
controllers out to something similar to an xbox controller. Heck, while I was
writing this guide they even added support for the Wooting 2 analog keyboard!

By opening up Steam Input to as many controllers as possible, Steam Input
actually solves a very large support issue. Game pad AND keybaord and mouse
commands can be assigned to any controller Steam Input supports, which means the
Steam Controllers future proof compatibility extends to all controllers. It does
not matter at all that games on pc typically dont support the gyro found in all
but the xbox controllers, because thanks to rebinding utilities like Steam Input
the mouse can be assigned to gyro and vi o ala! You now have gyro aiming in that
game.

This serves as an excellent ending point for this section of the intro and segue
into the next; an introduction to the software known as Steam Input.
